# Setting Up a Custom GitHub Actions Runner

### About this lab
You are setting up a new app’s CI/CD process. Due to compliance requirements, this team’s code needs to run on your organization’s infrastructure, not GitHub’s. You will be provided with an EC2 instance, which you will need to set up to work as a GitHub runner. You will then need to set up a workflow to run only on that runner. Finally, you will need to disconnect the runner from your repo for the end of the lab.

### Learning objectives
- Set Up the Lab VM to Work as a Runner Connected to Your GitHub Repo
- Set Up a Workflow to Run on the Runner
- Remove the Runner from Your Repo


<br><br><br>


## Solution

## Set Up the Lab VM to Work as a Runner Connected to Your GitHub Repo
### Create a GitHub Repository and Add a Runner
1. After logging in to your GitHub account, select the Repositories tab, then click New.
2. In the Repository name field, enter an easily identifiable name for the repository (like needs-custom-runner).
3. Select Private to ensure only authorized users can create pull requests for your custom runner.
4. Click Create repository.
5. After the repository is created, select Settings in the top menu bar.
6. In the sidebar menu, select Actions, then select Runners.
7. Click New self-hosted Runner. GitHub provides you a list of commands to download, configure, and run the runner on a VM.
8. If you're using the VM provided for the lab, select the Linux option for the Operating System.


### Configure the Runner in Your VM
1. Navigate to your VM.
2. Copy and paste all the Download commands and the first Configure command from GitHub into your VM, one at a time. After all the commands are entered into your VM, the VM connects to GitHub and authenticates the runner.
3. When prompted in the VM terminal, press Enter to accept all of the defaults.
4. Copy and paste the last Configure command from GitHub into your VM to run the runner:
    `./run.sh`
5. When the runner is connected to GitHub and Listening for Jobs, navigate back to GitHub.

> Click Runners in the left-hand menu to go back to your list of Runners. You should see the runner you created and its labels.

## Set Up a Workflow to Run on the Runner
1. In your GitHub repository, select Code in the top menu bar.
2. Below Quick setup, select creating a new file.
3. In the first Name your file text box, enter .github/.
4. In the second Name your file text box, enter workflows/.
5. In the third Name your file text box, enter action.yaml.
6. Configure your first workflow in the file editor:
    ```yaml
    name: Must run on custom runner

    on: push

    jobs:
    init:
        runs-on: self-hosted
        steps:
        - run: echo 'hello cloud gurus'
        - run: echo $HOSTNAME
    ```
> Note: Make sure the indentation is correct. Otherwise, this workflow will trigger an error.

7. Scroll down to the bottom of the page and click Commit new file.
8. After the file is committed, select Actions in the top menu bar. You should see that your workflow triggered a run.
9. Navigate back to your VM terminal. You should see that it picked up the init job and ran it successfully.

## Remove the Runner from Your Repo
1. Navigate back to GitHub and select Settings in the top menu bar.
2. In the sidebar menu, select Actions, then select Runners.
3. Select the menu icon to the far right of the runner, then click Remove.
4. Copy the Remove the runner command provided on-screen.
5. Navigate back to your VM terminal.
6. Press CTRL+C to stop the runner.
7. Run your copied command in the terminal to gracefully remove the runner. The runner and any associated credentials are removed.
8. Navigate back to GitHub and refresh the Runners page. You should see that you no longer have any self-hosted runners configured for your repository.